<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8' ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">
<ui:composition xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"
                xmlns:ui="http://java.sun.com/jsf/facelets"
                xmlns:h="http://java.sun.com/jsf/html"
                xmlns:f="http://java.sun.com/jsf/core"
                xmlns:p="http://primefaces.org/ui"
                template="/template/_template.xhtml">
    <ui:define name="stacker"/>
    <ui:define name="content">
        <h:panelGrid style="padding:30px 30px 20px 40px; width: 90%">
            <font style="font-size: 18px; color: #2779aa"><b>Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)</b></font>
            <h:panelGrid style="padding: 10px; line-height: 21px; font-family: Arial; width: 100%">
                <p:tabView id="ac" style="width:100%; border: none; background: none; font-size: 13px !important;"> 
                    <p:tab title ="Data Processing">
                        <OL style="line-height: 24px;">
                            <LI>
                                <a href="#ma">When should I use MultiOmics? </a>
                            </LI>
                            <LI>
                                <a href="#input1">What types of input does MultiOmics accept?</a>
                            </LI>   
                            <LI>
                                <a href="#missing">Why should I use the data missing value imputation option?</a>
                            </LI>
                            <LI>
                                <a href="#filter">Why should I use the data filtering option?</a>
                            </LI>
                            <LI>
                                <a href="#filter1">Which option should I choose to perform data filtering?</a>
                            </LI>
                            <LI>
                                <a href="#norm1">Why should I normalize my data?</a>
                            </LI>
                            <LI>
                                <a href="#norm2">What are the various normalization methods and which method should I choose?</a>
                            </LI>
                            <LI>
                                <a href="#rare">When should I opt to rarefy my data?</a>
                            </LI>
                            <LI>
                                <a href="#outl">How can I detect and deal with outliers?</a>
                            </LI>
                            <LI>
                                <a href="#secure">Is the data I uploaded kept confidential?</a>
                            </LI>
                            <LI>
                                <a href="#dst">Are non-human data sets supported?</a>
                            </LI>                            
                        </OL>
                          
                        <ol>
                            <li>
                                <h4><a name = "ma">When should I use <i>MultiOmics</i>?</a></h4>
                                <p>
                                    MultiOmics is a user-friendly, comprehensive web-based tool for integrating and analyzing two different -omics datasets from the same samples. The focus of this tool is to perform 
                                    <b>statistical analysis</b>, <b>visual exploration</b>, and <b>data integration</b>. 
                                </p>
                            </li>
                            <li>
                                <h4><a name = "input1">What types of input does <i>MultiOmics</i> accept?</a></h4>
                                <p>
                                    MultiOmics supports common data formats generated in -omics studies including 
                                    csv., txt., together with associated meta-data files. 
                                    Detailed descriptions, screenshots, and example datasets can be found on the 
                                    <a href="../../docs/DataFormat.xhtml">Data Format</a> page.
                                </p>
                            </li>
                            <li>
                                <h4><a name = "missing">Why should I use the data missing value imputation option?</a></h4>
                                <p>
                                    MultiOmics uses O2PLS, which requires no missing value. 
                                </p>
                            </li>
                            <li>
                                <h4><a name = "filter">Why should I use the data filtering?</a></h4>
                                <p>
                                    The purpose of data filtering is to allow users to remove low quality and/or uninformative features to improve 
                                    downstream statisitcal analysis. MultiOmics contains three data filtering procedures:
                                    <ol>
                                        <li>
                                            Minimal data filtering (applied to all analysis) - the procedure will remove features containing all zeros, or appearing in only one sample. 
                                            These extremely rare features should be removed from consideration; 
                                        </li>
                                        <li>
                                            Low abundance features - they may be due to sequencing errors or low-level contaminations; 
                                        </li>
                                        <li>
                                            Low varianace features - they are unlikely to be associated with the conditions under study;
                                        </li>
                                    </ol>
                                    Note, the last two options are not used for within-sample (alpha diveristy) profiling, but are strongly recommended for comparative analysis. 
                                </p>
                            </li>
                            <li>
                                <h4><a name = "filter1">Which option should I choose to perform data filtering?</a></h4>
                                <p>
                                    Users can choose from low count filter options to filter features with very small counts in very few sample (i.e. low prevalence).
                                    If primary purpose is comparative analysis, users should filter features that exhibit low variance based on 
                                    inter-quantile range, standard deviation or coefficient of variation, as they are very unlikely to be significant 
                                    in the comparative analysis.
                                </p>
                            </li>
                            <li>
                                <h4><a name = "norm1">Why should I normalize my data?</a></h4>
                                <p>
                                    Metagenomic data possess some unique characteristics such as vast differences in sequencing depth, 
                                    sparsity (containing many zeros) and large variance in distributions (overdispersion). These unique attributes
                                    have made it inappropriate to directly apply methods developed in other omics fields to perform differential 
                                    analysis on metegenomic data. To account for these issues, MultiOmics includes various 
                                    normalization methods such as:
                                    <ul>
                                        <li>
                                            <b>Rarefaction and scaling methods</b>: these methods deal with uneven sequencing depths by bringing samples to the same scale for comparison.
                                        </li>
                                        <li>
                                            <b>Transformation methods</b>: it includes methods to deal with sparsity, compositionality, and large variations within the data.
                                        </li>
                                    </ul>
                                </p>
                            </li>
                            <li>
                                <h4><a name="norm2">What are the various normalization methods and which method should I choose?</a></h4>
                                <p>
                                    MultiOmics supports a variety of methods for data normalization. A brief summary is provided below:
                                </p>
    
                                    <b>Data Scaling</b>
                                    <ul>
                                         <li>
                                            <b>Total Sum Scaling (TSS) normalization</b>: this method removes technical bias related to different 
                                            sequencing depth in different libraries via simply dividing each feature count with the 
                                            total library size to yield relative proportion of counts for that feature. 
                                            For easier interpretation, we can multiply it by 1,000,000 to get the number of reads 
                                            corresponding to that feature per million reads. <a href="https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21702898" target='_blank'>LEfSe</a> utilizes this kind of approach.
                                        </li>                                       
                                        <li>
                                            <b>Cumulative Sum Scaling (CSS) normalization</b>: it calculates the quantile of the count distribution of samples 
                                            where they all should be roughly equivalent and independent of each other up to this quantile under 
                                            the assumption that, at this range, counts are derived from a common distribution. 
                                            By default, <a href="http://www.nature.com/nmeth/journal/v10/n12/full/nmeth.2658.html" target='_blank'>metagenomeSeq</a> utilizes this approach for differential analysis.
                                        </li> 
                                        
                                        <li>
                                            <b>Upper Quantile (UQ) normalization</b>: this is the upper-quartile normalization method of <a href="http://bmcbioinformatics.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1471-2105-11-94" target='_blank'>Bullard et al </a> (2010), 
                                            in which the scale factors are calculated from the 75% quantile of the counts for each library, 
                                            after removing features which are zero in all libraries. This idea is generalized here to allow 
                                            scaling by any quantile of the distributions. As negative counts are <b>not</b> allowed, we replaced the all negative counts to zero.
                                        </li>  
                                        <li>
                                            <b>Auto Scaling normalization</b>:
                                        </li>
                                        <li>
                                            <b>Min-Max Scaling normalization</b>:
                                        </li>
                                        <li>
                                            <b>Quantile normalization</b>:
                                        </li>
                            
                                    </ul>
                                    
                                    <br></br>
                                    
                                    <b>Data Transformation</b>
                                    <ul>
                                        <li>
                                            <b>Relative log expression (RLE) normalization</b>: this is the scaling factor method 
                                            proposed by <a href="https://genomebiology.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/gb-2010-11-10-r106" target='_blank'>Anders and Huber </a> (2010). This method calculates the median library from the geometric 
                                            mean of all columns. The median ratio of each sample to the median library is taken as the 
                                            scaling factor. As negative counts are <b>not</b> allowed, we replaced the all negative counts to zero.
                                        </li>
                                        <li>
                                            <b>Trimmed mean of M-values (TMM) normalization</b>: this is the weighted trimmed mean of M-values proposed by <a href="https://genomebiology.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/gb-2010-11-3-r25" target='_blank'>Robinson and Oshlack </a>
                                            (2010), where the weights are from the delta method on Binomial data. As negative counts are <b>not</b> allowed, we replaced the all negative counts to zero.
                                        </li>
                                        <li>
                                            <b>Centered Log-Ratio (CLR) Transformation</b>: this method is specially designed to normalize compositional 
                                            data. It convert the relative abundances of each part, or the values in the table of counts for each part, 
                                            to ratios between all parts by calculating geometric mean of all values. This method is robust 
                                            if data sets were not sparse because the geometric mean cannot be computed if any of the feature counts are zero. 
                                        </li>
                                        <li>
                                            <b>Generalized Log (GLT) Transformation</b>: this algorithm is following: log(y + <math><msqrt><mi>y&sup2; + &lambda;</mi></msqrt></math>). 
                                            A work from <a href="http://dmrocke.ucdavis.edu/" target='_blank'>David Rocke</a>.
                                        </li>
                                        <li>
                                            <b>Two-parameter Box-cox Transformation</b>: the algorithm is explained <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Power_transform#Box%E2%80%93Cox_transformation" target='_blank'>here</a>.
                                            Please note that every data element (y<subscript>i</subscript>) in -omics datasets should be bigger than the &lambda;<subscript>2</subscript>. 
                                            
                                            <br> </br>
                                            If &lambda;<subscript>1</subscript> = 0, ln(y<subscript>i</subscript> + &lambda;<subscript>2</subscript>).
                                            <br> </br>
                                            If &lambda;<subscript>1</subscript> &ne; 0, [(y<subscript>i</subscript> + &lambda;<subscript>2</subscript>)^&lambda;<subscript>1</subscript> - 1] / &lambda;<subscript>1</subscript>.
                                        </li>
                                        <li>
                                            <b>Variance Stabilizing normalization</b>:
                                        </li>
                                        <li>
                                            <b>Log2 Transformation</b>:
                                            As zero and negative counts are <b>not</b> allowed, we replaced the all zero and negative counts to the 'minimum/10' amongst all positive values.
                                        </li>
                                        <li>
                                            <b>Log2-counts per million</b>:
                                            As negative counts are <b>not</b> allowed, we replaced the all negative counts to zero.
                                        </li>
                                    </ul>
                                
                                <p>
                                    Please note, data normalization is mainly used for visual data exploration such as beta-diversity and clustering analysis. 
                                    It is also used for comparative analysis using statistical methods without known normalization procedures that work 
                                    best (univariate statistics and LEfSe). Meanwhile, other comparative analyses will use their own specific 
                                    normalization methods. For example, cumulative sum scaling (CSS) normalization is used for metagenomeSeq, 
                                    and trimmed mean of M-values (TMM) is applied for edgeR.
                                </p>
                                <p>
                                    At the moment, there is no consensus guideline with regard to which normalization should be used. Users are adviced to <b>explore different approaches and 
                                        then visually examine the separation patterns to assess the effects of different normalization procedures with regard to experimental conditions 
                                        or other meta-data of interest</b>. For detailed discussion about these methods, users are referred to two recent papers  
                                    <a href="https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003531" target='_blank'>Paul J. McMurdie et al.</a> and 
                                    <a href="http://doi.org/10.1186/s40168-016-0208-8" target='_blank'>Jonathan Thorsen et al.</a>
                                </p>
                                    
                            </li>
                            <li>
                                <h4><a name = "rare">When should I opt to rarefy my data?</a></h4>
                                <p>
                                    When the datasets are big (especially, # of features), it can cause the slow performance on the website, without giving huge benefits on analysis.  
                                    In MultiOmics, users can directly visualize the sample size (available on the <b>Data Inspection</b> page) to check the need of rarefaction for their data.
                                </p>
                            </li>
                            <li>
                                <h4><a name = "outl">How can I detect and deal with outliers?</a></h4>
                                <p>
                                    Outliers refers to those samples that are significantly different from the "majority". 
                                    The potential outlier will distinguish itself as the sample located far away from major 
                                    clusters or trends formed by the remaining data. To discover potential outliers, users can 
                                    use a variety of summary plots to visualize their data. For instance, a sample with extreme 
                                    diversity (alpha or beta) or very low sequencing depth (rarefaction curve analysis or sample size viewer)
                                    may be considered a potential outlier. Outliers may be arise due to either biological or technical reasons. To deal with outliers, 
                                    the first step is to check if those samples were measured properly. In many cases, outliers are 
                                    the result of operational errors during the analytical process. If those values cannot be corrected 
                                    (i.e. by normalization procedures), they should be removed from your analysis via Sample Editor.
                                </p>
                            </li>
                            <li>
                                <h4><a name = "secure">Is the data I uploaded kept confidential?</a></h4>
                                <p>
                                    Yes. The data files you upload for analysis as well as any analysis results, are not downloaded or examined in any way by 
                                    the administrators, unless required for system maintenance and troubleshooting. All files are deleted from the server after no 
                                    more than 72 hours, and no archives or backups are kept. You are advised to download your results as an zip immediately 
                                    after performing an analysis.
                                </p>
                            </li>
                            <li>
                                <h4><a name = "dst">Are non-human data-sets available?</a></h4>
                                <p>
                                    Yes, although, most current data sets are from human studies. The resources will be updated once high-quality and well-annotated 
                                    public data sets become available. 
                                </p>
                            </li>
                        </ol>
                    </p:tab>
                    <p:tab title="O2PLS analysis">
                        <ol style="line-height: 24px;">
                            <LI>
                                <a href="#output1">What types of outputs does MultiOmics spit out?</a>
                            </LI> 
                            <LI>
                                <a href="#output2">How to interprete each output?</a>
                            </LI>                             
                        </ol>
                        <ol>
                            <li>
                                <h4><a name="output1">What types of outputs does MultiOmics spit out?</a></h4>
                                <p>
                                    MultiOmics includes various useful outputs such as:
                                    <ul>
                                        <li>
                                            <b>Criteria of choosing # of joint and orthogonal variables</b>:  
                                        </li>
                                        <li>
                                            <b>Variation tables</b>: 
                                        </li>
                                        <li>
                                            <b>Sum of Squares (SSQ) plots</b>: 
                                        </li>
                                         <li>
                                            <b>Loading plots and tables</b>: 
                                        </li>
                                        <li>
                                            <b>Score plots and tables</b>: 
                                        </li>  
                                        <li>
                                            <b>Quality of predictions</b>: 
                                        </li>  
                                        <li>
                                            <b>Correlation plots</b>: 
                                        </li>  
                                        <li>
                                            <b>PCA on O2PLS scores</b>: 
                                        </li>  
                                        <li>
                                            <b>Sankey diagram</b>: 
                                        </li>  
                                        
                                    </ul>
                                </p>
                            </li>
    
                            <li>
                                <h4><a name="output2">How to interprete each output?</a></h4>
                               <p>
                                    MultiOmics includes various useful outputs such as:
                                    <ul>
                                        <li>
                                            <b>Criteria of choosing # of joint and orthogonal variables</b>:  
                                        </li>
                                        <li>
                                            <b>Variation tables</b>: 
                                        </li>
                                        <li>
                                            <b>Sum of Squares (SSQ) plots</b>: 
                                        </li>
                                         <li>
                                            <b>Loading plots and tables</b>: 
                                        </li>
                                        <li>
                                            <b>Score plots and tables</b>: 
                                        </li>  
                                        <li>
                                            <b>Quality of predictions</b>: 
                                        </li>  
                                        <li>
                                            <b>Correlation plots</b>: 
                                        </li>  
                                        <li>
                                            <b>PCA on O2PLS scores</b>: 
                                        </li>  
                                        <li>
                                            <b>Sankey diagram</b>: 
                                        </li>   
                                    </ul>
                                </p>
                            </li>
                            
                        </ol>
                    </p:tab>
                </p:tabView>  
            </h:panelGrid>
        </h:panelGrid>
    </ui:define>
</ui:composition>
